Has your friend ever asked you to name your top 10 favorite movies of all time, only to be met with your blank stare as your perfectionist brain contemplates whether Titanic makes the sut or sits just back at #11? Have you ever felt the urge to rank all the colors in your childhood crayon box, compare lists with that same film-loving friend, and passionately argue why Goldenrod is obviously inferior to Macaroni & Cheese? What if you could harness the algorithmic power of computers to sort objects not by their objective values but their subjective values? Well, now you can! With Manual Merge Sort, you can efficiently churn out rankings more precise than any tier list or iceberg meme ever could be, just by answering this-or-that questions. And most importantly -- you'll have confidence that your list is correct according to the world's most important judge of correctness: you.

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

And...that's basically as much excitement as I can drum up for this program. Manual Merge Sort isn't flashy or groundbreaking. In fact, it may have the smallest scope of any coding project you have ever seen on this site. In spite of that, I truly believe it earns its place in my professional portfolio. The lessons I took away from the process of building this tool, further validated by the fact that I have run this program to do real-life tasks, lead me to view the experience as a microcosm of good software development as a whole.

I knew I could conserve coding time by working smarter, not harder. Inventing a new sorting algorithm just for this project would have wasted valuable development effort. Instead, my template was merge sort, which has been around for nearly a century. If I had started this project in the era of large language models, I would have generated standard merge sort code with an AI prompt and pasted the result into my blank file to get my work started in the smallest amount of time. The simplest approach is usually the best approach.

The key to ending up with a user-friendly application is to make the user a priority from the start. One example is when I was deciding between merge sort and quick sort, both of which are linearithmic on average, in the early phases of the project. The choice became clear when I considered the impact of the worst-case scenario on the user experience. An unlucky selection of pivot elements for several rounds of quick sort bumps the complexity up to quadratic time. Since a human is the entity in charge of making all the comparisons in my manual sorting program, that person could become frustrated at having to answer more comparison questions than necessary.

Finally, no amount of theoretical planning can eliminate every issue with an application; some are not apparent until real-world testing exposes them. The Python file in this repository is version 2 of Manual Merge Sort, which uses the iterative variant of the title algorithm versus version 1's recursive variant. I was motivated to make this change after a series of output rankings that I wasn't quite satisfied with how well they represented my opinion, even though in theory they should perfectly match my opinions because I was the one making the comparisons. In reality, I suffered from decision fatigue while using the program; it would ask me so many consecutive questions about a small subset of the elements that I would drift into auto-pilot and input some wrong choices without thinking! With version 2, once I answer a question involving a certain element, I know that element won't show show up again until the next iteration. A fresh set of choices keeps me on my toes and actively thinking properly about each question.
